# hledger-vega

Chart your hledger data with interactive graphs.
A reasonably comprehensive example of what can be done can be seen
[here](https://xitian9.github.io/hledger-vega/vegaexample.html).

I've tried many different approaches to generating graphs, from vanilla gnuplot
to postprocessing in R with ggplot2.
They were all either too limiting, or required too much maintenance to keep
working.
I wanted to keep the interface as close as possible to running a hledger
command, so it would be as accessible as possible for others, while maintaining
customisability.
There's a long way to go to meet all these goals, but I think this is a good
start.

This requires a basic webserver running on your computer to execute the vega
specifications.

Note that this requires a version of hledger which supports the `--layout=tidy`
option, which is currently only available in the master branch.
Suggestions for how to make this more accessible and useful are very welcome.

## Basic workflow

This project uses a combination of [vega-lite](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/)
specifications, hledger args files, and report files to generate the graphs.
Each graph requires a JSON file giving the vega-lite specification, which are
then embedded in an html file.
Each graph takes its data from a CSV file which is the result of one or more
hledger calls.
Each CSV file is generated by a report file which lists the args files to be
used in that report, optionally along with a label to be used for the data.
The args files are usual [hledger args files](https://hledger.org/hledger.html#command-arguments).


## Getting started

Everything you need to create a suite of charts for your own data can be found
[here](src).

It includes:
- A [collection of args files](src/args) to specify the hledger calls needed.
- A [collection of report files](src/reports) telling tow to combine the hledger data into csv files
- The [hledger-vega bash script](src/hledger-vega), which will the generate csv files.
- A [collection of vega-lite specifications](src/reports), which specify how to generate the charts from the csv files.
- A basic [html file](src/index.html), which embeds the charts in a webpage for viewing.

To get started, clone the directory and run `hledger-vega` to generate your data.
Next start up web server in the `src` directory, and then point your web
browser to the served html file.
There are many static web servers you can use for these purposes.
If you have access to python, you can run `python3 -m http.server` to create a simple one.

Note that the provided args files assume that your statement of accounts uses
the standard top-level names assets, liabilities, expenses, and revenue(s)/income.
If you use a different naming system you should alter the args files to suit your system.


## Making your own charts

Let's go through a quick example of how to generate a basic chart.
Suppose we'd like to chart our income statement: a measure of how much we're
earning and spending over a given period.

### Create the args files

First, we need to decide which data series we want to plot, and the
corresponding queries to pass to hledger.
We will want to plot both expenses and income.
First, let's figure out the common options between the calls.

`hledger bal --daily --depth=0 --cost --value=then,USD`
This will make sure costs are accumulated daily, boiled down to a single number
each day, converted to cost, and then valued in USD (or your own local
currency).
It's not strictly necessary to separate these out, but let's do it to save some work.
We will put these options into `args/change.args`.
```
--value=then,USD
--cost
--daily
--depth=0
```

Next, let's create the query for our expenses.
I do not want my taxes included as an expense, so I'll leave them out.
`hledger bal --daily --depth=0 --cost --value=then,USD "^expenses" not:"^expenses:.*taxes"`
First we import the `change.args` file we just created to get the common
options, then include the rest of the query in `args/expenses.args`.
```
@change.args
^expenses
not:^expenses:taxes
```

Now let's do income. 
I only want to include post-tax income, and furthermore do not want any
retirement income included.
We also should use `--invert`, since revenues are negative in hledger.
`hledger bal --daily --depth=0 --cost --value=then,USD --invert "^income" "^expenses:.*taxes" not:"retirement"`
Let's put that into `args/income.args`.
```
@change.args
--invert
^income
^expenses:taxes
not:retirement
```

### Create the report file

Now that we've specified our data series, we need to tell hledger-vega how to
put them together into a csv file suitable for charting.
This is fairly simple; we just need to specify the args files to use, one on
each line, along with the  name for each series, separated with a semicolon.
Create a file `reports/incomestatement.report`.
```
expenses;Total expenses
income;Total income
```

### Generate the data files

We've now given hledger-vega all the information it needs to generate our csv
files.
Just run hledger-vega, and it should create a file `data/incomestatement.csv`.
You will need to run this whenever you want to update the data your chart uses.

### Chart the csv files

All that's left is to create the vega-lite specification to display this chart,
located at [incomestatement.json](src/reports/incomestatement.json).
Notice that it uses the `incomestatment.csv` file we generated earlier:
`"data": { "url": "data/incomestatement.csv"}`.

We can now use vega-embed to embed this in our html file
[index.html](src/index.html).
The line `vegaEmbed('#vis1', "reports/incomestatement.json");` says to embed the chart
specified by `incomestatement.json` in the element with id `vis1`.

Fire up your webserver in a place that can see these files, and they should be visible!


## Further customisation

You can customise things further, limited only by what you can get out of
hledger and your skills with vega-lite.
There are further examples of vega-lite specifications and reports in the
[docs](docs) directory.
Let me know if you create any new examples that you find useful.
Maybe others will find them useful too.
